Splitting and grouping side quest (#595)
nextflow-io/training: docs/side_quests/splitting-and-grouping.md

ch_normal_samples.view()
```

_After:_

```groovy title="main.nf" linenums="2"
ch_samplesheet = Channel.fromPath("./data/samplesheet.csv")
                    .splitCsv(header: true)
ch_normal_samples = ch_samplesheet
                    .filter { sample -> sample.type == 'normal' }
ch_tumor_samples = ch_samplesheet
                    .filter { sample -> sample.type == 'tumor' }
ch_normal_samples.view()
ch_tumor_samples.view()
```

```bash title="View tumor samples"
nextflow run main.nf
```

```console title="View tumor samples"
 N E X T F L O W   ~  version 24.10.5

Launching `main.nf` [big_bernard] DSL2 - revision: 897c9e44cc

[id:sampleA, repeat:1, type:normal, bam:sampleA_rep1_normal.bam]
[id:sampleA, repeat:1, type:tumor, bam:sampleA_rep1_tumor.bam]
[id:sampleA, repeat:2, type:normal, bam:sampleB_rep1_normal.bam]
[id:sampleA, repeat:2, type:tumor, bam:sampleB_rep1_tumor.bam]
[id:sampleB, repeat:1, type:normal, bam:sampleC_rep1_normal.bam]
[id:sampleB, repeat:1, type:tumor, bam:sampleC_rep1_tumor.bam]
[id:sampleC, repeat:1, type:normal, bam:sampleD_rep1_normal.bam]
[id:sampleC, repeat:1, type:tumor, bam:sampleD_rep1_tumor.bam]
```

> We've managed to separate out the normal and tumor samples into two different channels but they're mixed up when we `view` them in the console! If we want, we can remove one of the `view` operators to see the data in each channel separately. Let's remove the `view` operator for the normal samples:

Reviewer: ah sorry, saw @pinin4fjords comment above.

[id:sampleA, repeat:2, type:tumor, bam:sampleB_rep1_tumor.bam]
[id:sampleB, repeat:1, type:tumor, bam:sampleC_rep1_tumor.bam]
[id:sampleC, repeat:1, type:tumor, bam:sampleD_rep1_tumor.bam]
```

Note how we can only see the tumor samples in the output. This is because we removed the `view` operator for the normal samples.

### Takeaway

In this section, you've learned:

- **Filtering data**: How to filter data with `filter`
- **Splitting data**: How to split data into different channels based on a condition
- **Viewing data**: How to use `view` to print the data

We've now separated out the normal and tumor samples into two different channels. Next, we'll join the normal and tumor samples on the `id` field.

---

## 3. Join on sample ID

In the previous section, we separated out the normal and tumor samples into two different channels. These could be processed independently using specific processes or workflows based on their type. But what happens when we want to compare the normal and tumor samples from the same patient? At this point, we need to join them back together making sure to match the samples based on their `id` field.

> Nextflow includes many methods for combining channels, but in this case the most appropriate operator is [`join`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/operator.html#join). This acts like a SQL `JOIN` operation, where we specify the key to join on and the type of join to perform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nextflow includes many methods for combining channels, but in this case the most appropriate operator is [`join`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/operator.html#join).  If you are familiar with SQL, it acts like the `JOIN` operation, where we specify the key to join on and the type of join to perform.
```

                    }
ch_tumor_samples = ch_samplesheet
                    .filter { sample -> sample.type == 'tumor' }
                    .map { sample -> [
                            [sample.id, sample.repeat],
                            sample
                        ]
                    }
```

Now we should see the join is occurring but using both the `id` and `repeat` fields.

```bash title="View normal and tumor samples"
nextflow run main.nf
```

```console title="View normal and tumor samples"
 N E X T F L O W   ~  version 24.10.5

Launching `main.nf` [prickly_wing] DSL2 - revision: 3bebf22dee

[[sampleA, 1], [id:sampleA, repeat:1, type:normal, bam:sampleA_rep1_normal.bam], [id:sampleA, repeat:1, type:tumor, bam:sampleA_rep1_tumor.bam]]
[[sampleA, 2], [id:sampleA, repeat:2, type:normal, bam:sampleB_rep1_normal.bam], [id:sampleA, repeat:2, type:tumor, bam:sampleB_rep1_tumor.bam]]
[[sampleB, 1], [id:sampleB, repeat:1, type:normal, bam:sampleC_rep1_normal.bam], [id:sampleB, repeat:1, type:tumor, bam:sampleC_rep1_tumor.bam]]
[[sampleC, 1], [id:sampleC, repeat:1, type:normal, bam:sampleD_rep1_normal.bam], [id:sampleC, repeat:1, type:tumor, bam:sampleD_rep1_tumor.bam]]
```

> Note how we have a tuple of two elements (`id` and `repeat` fields) as the first element of each joined result. This demonstrates how complex items can be used as a joining key, enabling fairly intricate matching between samples from the same conditions.

Reviewer: should we link out to more advanced joining on different key indices

[[id:sampleC, repeat:1], [type:normal, bam:sampleD_rep1_normal.bam], [type:tumor, bam:sampleD_rep1_tumor.bam], chr3]
```

Success! We have repeated every sample for every single interval in our 3 interval list. We've effectively tripled the number of items in our channel. It's a little hard to read though, so in the next section we will tidy it up.

### 4.2. Organise the channel

We can use the `map` operator to tidy and refactor our sample data so it's easier to understand. Let's move the intervals string to the joining map at the first element.

_Before:_

```groovy title="main.nf" linenums="25"
ch_combined_samples = ch_joined_samples.combine(ch_intervals)
                    .view()
```

_After:_

```groovy title="main.nf" linenums="25"
ch_combined_samples = ch_joined_samples.combine(ch_intervals)
                    .map { grouping_key, normal, tumor, interval ->
                        [
                            grouping_key + [interval: interval],
                            normal,
                            tumor
                        ]

                    }
                    .view()
```

Wait? What did we do here? Let's go over it piece by piece.

> First, we use a map operator to iterate over every item in the channel. By using the names `grouping_key`, `normal`, `tumor` and `interval`, we can refer to the elements in the tuple by name instead of by index. This makes the code more readable and easier to understand.

Reviewer: Ah sorry, this was not a good description from me. I meant that earlier in the tutorial you refer to elements with `sample.` in the text, like here: https://github.com/nextflow-io/training/blame/b332b8f0189290f5da4b3808babe062c2cd46f98/docs/side_quests/splitting-and-grouping.md#L131 

I think it's a tiny thing.

# Splitting and Grouping

Nextflow helps you work with your data in flexible ways. One of the most useful things you can do is split your data into different streams and then group related items back together.

> Think of it like sorting mail: you might first separate letters by their destination, process each pile differently, and then recombine items going to the same person. In Nextflow, we use special operators to do this with our scientific data.

Reviewer: 📭

Think of it like sorting mail: you might first separate letters by their destination, process each pile differently, and then recombine items going to the same person. In Nextflow, we use special operators to do this with our scientific data.

Nextflow's channel system is at the heart of this flexibility. Channels act as pipelines that connect different parts of your workflow, allowing data to flow through your analysis. You can create multiple channels from a single data source, process each channel differently, and then merge channels back together when needed. This approach lets you design workflows that naturally mirror the branching and converging paths of complex bioinformatics analyses.

In this side quest, we'll explore how to split and group data using Nextflow's powerful channel operators. We'll start with a samplesheet containing information about different samples and their associated data. By the end of this side quest, you'll be able to manipulate and combine data streams effectively, making your workflows more efficient and easier to understand.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will: 
```

- `id`: The sample identifier (sampleA, sampleB, sampleC)
- `repeat`: The replicate number (1 or 2)
- `type`: The sample type (normal or tumor)
- `fastq1`: Path to the first FASTQ file
- `fastq2`: Path to the second FASTQ file

This format makes it easy to access specific fields from each sample. For example, we could access the sample ID with `row.id` or the FASTQ paths with `row.fastq1` and `row.fastq2`.

This means we have successfully read in the samplesheet and have access to the data in each row. We can start to implement this in our pipeline.

### 1.2. Use dump to pretty print the data

For a prettier output format, we can use the [`dump` operator](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/operator.html#dump) instead of `view`:

```groovy title="main.nf" linenums="1"
workflow {
    samplesheet = Channel.fromPath("./data/samplesheet.csv")
                        .splitCsv(header: true)
                        .dump(tag: 'samples', pretty: true)
}
```

```bash title="Read the samplesheet"
nextflow run main.nf
```

```console title="Read samplesheet with dump"
 N E X T F L O W   ~  version 24.10.5

Launching `./main.nf` [grave_stone] DSL2 - revision: b2bafa8755
```

> Wait?! Where is our output? `dump` is a special operator that prints the data to the console only when specifically enabled. That is what the `tag` parameter is for. Let's enable it:

Reviewer 2: Is the whole view/ dump thing something we want to do in this module?

        "fastq2": "sampleC_rep1_normal_R2.fastq.gz"
    },
    {
        "id": "sampleC",
        "repeat": "1",
        "type": "tumor",
        "fastq1": "sampleC_rep1_tumor_R1.fastq.gz",
        "fastq2": "sampleC_rep1_tumor_R2.fastq.gz"
    }
]
```

Using a named closure in the map allows us to reuse the same map in multiple places which reduces our risk of introducing errors. It also makes the code more readable and easier to maintain.

### Takeaway

In this section, you've learned:

- **Manipulating Tuples**: How to use `map` to isolate a field in a tuple
- **Joining Tuples**: How to use `join` to combine tuples based on the first field
- **Creating Joining Keys**: How to use `subMap` to create a new joining key
- **Named Closures**: How to use a named closure in map

You now have a workflow that can split a samplesheet, filter the normal and tumor samples, join them together by sample ID and replicate number, then dump the results.

This is a common pattern in bioinformatics workflows where you need to match up samples after processing independently, so it is a useful skill. Next, we will look at repeating a sample multiple times.

## 4. Spread samples over intervals

> Spreading samples over different conditions is a common pattern in bioinformatics workflows. For example, it is used to spread variant calling over a range of intervals. This can help distribute work across multiple cores or nodes and make the pipelines more efficient and be turned around faster.

Reviewer 2: I think you probably need to explain intervals for the uninitiated
